* Title Slide:

- Last year I presented some work on how to guide reasoning with
  reasoning and what I am going to show you in this talk is somewhat a
  continuation of this work.  Last year I had given my talk early in
  the week and so for the rest of week I could quitely sit down and
  listen to the other talks, and as the days were passing I started to
  notice some pattern, which is to quickly come up with reasonings
  that would either confirm or infirm a hypothesis, a lemma and guide
  the search of proof accordingly.  And so the last evening of the
  conference I started thinking "wouldn't it be so cool if this could
  be done in a precise way in a principled way?" and when I sat at the
  dinner table with Joseph and Zar and started to explain to that, not
  in detail, which I didn't know, but just the general idea.

* Outline

- My talk is in two parts

  1. How to estimate the probability of a conjecture to be a theorem,
  specifically using PLN, a logic that can deal with uncertainty.

  2. How to use these estimates to guide reasoning.

* State of the Art

- Regarding the problem of estimating the probability of a conjecture
  to be true, not a lot that has been written, but I want to mention
  the excellent work of Abram Demski, Scott Garrabrant and a few
  others.  It's about characterizing the evolution of a probabilistic
  distribution over propositions, as more and more computation becomes
  available, all this while while maintaining consistency, both with
  probability theory and the underlying logic.  It is very
  theoretical, and I am still trying to understand how to relate their
  work to what I am about to present.

* PLN on Theta

- So, how do I attempt to address that question?  I define a giantic
  ternary predicate that relates theories, proofs and theorems and I
  allow PLN to reason about it.

* PLN Recall:

- So now I'm going to have to give you a flash course on PLN.  In 2
  minutes.

- PLN stands for Probabilistic Logic Networks, was invented by Ben
  Goertzel, Matt Ikle and few others.  It is highly inspired by NAL,
  which stands for Non-Axiomatic Logic (even though the NAL was
  published after the PLN book, it was actually invented a little
  before).

- I want to mention Subjective Logic as well that has been developped
  in parallel, it is not PLN but it has some things in common with it,
  notably the use of second order probability distribution.  I am
  going to explain.

* Trad vs PLN:

- OK, so how PLN works.  I like to put it this way.  In a traditional
  logical system, you only go from theory to theorems.  You define a
  theory, and then you derive the theorems in that theory.  In PLN
  however, you can actually go both ways.  You can start from a theory
  and derive theorems, but you can also start from theorems and derive
  what theories would derive these theorems.  A good example would be
  physics, for instance theorems could be observations of the movement
  of bodies and a theory could be General Relativity.  PLN, in theory
  anyway, enables you to do that.

- But so how?  And the idea is to introduce inference rules that go in
  reverse.  So if we have a rule that goes from Theory to theorem,
  we're going to introduce one or more rules that go the other way.

* PLN reverse:

- Here's an example: Deduction, if A imples B and B imples C then A
  implies C.  How do we take the reverse.  We introduce two rules.
  Induction: that starts from the conclusion, so we move the
  conclusion as the first premise, then we keep the second premise as
  it was, and we infer the first premise.  Then we do the same for the
  untouched premise, this rule is called abduction.  I will explain
  why this one is called induction and why this one is called
  abduction.

- So, I here you coming saying "but wait, this is not correct" only
  deduction is strictly correct, induction and abduction are not.  And
  yes you would be right, in a traditional binary logic, but PLN is
  not a binary logic.

* PLN Truth Value:

- in PLN, a truth value, is not binary, but it is not even a
  probability, it is a second order probability.  Meaning, a
  probability of a probability.

- What can you describe with this: you can describe complete
  uncertainty of a proposition, which would be represented by a flat
  uniform distribution.  That is, you not only do not know if the
  proposition is true or false, you don't even know the probability of
  being true of false, it could be any probability.

- The simplest way to describe such second order distribution is with
  what we call a simple truth value, characterized by two numbers: a
  strength that is a proxy for a probability and a confidence,
  indicating how much confidence you have in that strength.

- So here are some examples of second order distributions, as you
  accumulate evidence.  1, 2, etc, You get away from uniformity and
  shift to a side.  The more evidence you gather the thiner the second
  order distribution becomes.  That would be if you have negative
  evidence.  And of course you can have a combination of positive and
  negative evidence.  The idea is: a PLN truth value represents the
  posterior distribution given the available evidence.

* PLN Revision:

- In order to increase the confidence of a truth value we use the
  revision rule.  So if you came up with two truth values of say A =>
  B, via two path, as long as these path are indepedent, then you can
  combine them, you can merge their truth values to obtain a new truth
  value with a higher confidence.

- So what will typically happen is that given some extensional
  evidence, you will combine induction and revision in an iterative
  fashion.

* PLN Induction + Revision example:

- So let's give an example, we would like to infer if birds fly given
  instances of actual birds and a record of whether they fly.  First
  we have Tweety.  Tweety is a bird and Tweety flies, which, via
  induction allows us to derive that birds fly, with a low confidence.
  Then we can use Sparrow, which is a bird that flies which, again
  with induction allows us to derive that birds fly, again with a low
  confidence, then we can use the revision rule to combine these two
  pieces of evidence and increase the confidence over the birds fly
  implication.  Now we consider Doki.  Doki is a bird, but Doki does
  not fly, Doki is penguin, so we derive that birds do not fly, with a
  low confidence.  We use another round of revision, now you see
  taking into account Doki has still increased the confidence but it
  has also lowered the strength, it is no longer 1.  And finally we
  consider Goldie that is bird and flies and we obtain the final truth
  value.

* PLN Abduction + Revision:

- For abduction it is basically the same idea as with induction but we
  use properties instead of instances.  And of course we can combine
  both induction and abduction.  And PLN also supports quantifiers and
  all the good stuff you would expect.

* PLN and Theorem Proving (Crisp):

- So how to use PLN to estimate the probability of a conjecture to be
  a theorem.  Well, first, it can emulate crisp reasoning, so if we
  have an actual proof PLN should be able to discover it as well.  In
  this case we would infer a perfect truth value on the theorem, in
  the same manner that a traditional theorem prover would.  How would
  we do so, by formalizing the crisp inference rules in PLN from the
  lens of Theta.  For instance here would be a formalization of modus
  ponens, which can be read as if f is a proof of a -> b (imples here
  is the arrow type), and x is a proof a, then f of x is a proof of b.
  And we can assert that with certainty, so we can have set a
  confidence of one on the truth value.

* PLN and Theorem Proving (Uncertain):

- Let's say that you want to prove that H implies forall x P(x), but
  you are unable to prove it rigorously.  What you can do instead is:
  if you are able to partition your theory into many subcases, then
  maybe you can strengthen the implication between H and forall x P(x)
  using induction.  Likewise, if you're able to prove that P is true
  for a number of instances, such as P(0), P(1), etc, then you can
  potentially use abduction to strengthen the implication between H
  and forall x P(x).  And of course you can use both together.

* Theta

- OK, so let me jump straight into the matter.  So what have I done?
  I am using PLN for that, I am going to explain what is PLN in a
  minute but let me first give you the big picture.

- I define a giantic ternary predicate that relates theories, proofs
  and theorems.  I am using a type theoretic representation, where a
  theory is a set of typing relationships, a proposition is a type and
  a proof is an inhabitant of a type.

- Here is an example: where the theory is that zero is a natural, and
  S that constructs a natural from a natural.  A type could Nat, and a
  witness would e any natural number.  And an instance of Theta would
  be for that say 3 is in a natural number in the theory of Nat.

* Example (PC):

- Here is another example, using Propositional Calculus (borrowed from
  Metamath, if you want to know).

  So what it says is that, in propositional calculus, this term is a
  proof of this proposition.  In type theory, it means that this term
  is an inhabitant of that type, just trust me on that.  Of course if
  I scrumble the proof, then it is no longer an inhabitant that type,
  and therefore Theta will be evaluated to False on that instance.

* Theta, PLN:

- So, now that we have Theta, the question is: what can we do with it?
  That is where PLN gets in the picture.  So let me give some examples
  of what we can do.  We can now create the following queries: for
  instance, we can ask, given a theory Gamma, and a Type T, how
  probable it is that there exists a proof for it.  This $TV here is a
  meta variable that, after doing a bunch of PLN reasoning will be
  filled by a certain truth value representating a probability
  estimate, I'll explain.

- So that is out main query of interest, but we can also flip things
  around and ask, given a theory and proof term, how likely is there a
  theorem of that proof?

- Or why not ask, give me a proof, give me a proposition, how likely
  is there a theory in give this is a proof of this proposition.

- But we can be even more general than that and ask, how likely are
  there proofs of proopsitions in theories that fullfil certain
  properties.

- We can ask all sorts of things.  Alright, so how?

* Estimating Probability Conjecture Theorem in Practice

- OK, let me show you how that works in practice.  I have a general
  purpose backward chainer that I use as a theorem prover.  It is
  implemented in MeTTa but it does not matter for the purpose of this
  talk.  Let me walk you through this call.  bc is the backward
  chainer, first it takes a number of params to control its behavior,
  how much resources to allocate in the search, that sort of things.
  Then is takes a theory, a collection of typing relationships.  And
  then it takes a query in the form of a typing relationship that
  contains holes.  The hole here is on the proof, cause that is what
  we're looking but there can be holes anywhere.  And what the
  backward chainer attempts to fill those holes with actual values.

- To estimate the probability that such proof does exist, I convert
  that backward call into another backward chainer call, involving
  this time not the THEORY of the problem of hand, but the theory of
  PLN and Theta in general, and I reformulate the query to be a PLN
  query.  How do I obtain it?  My algorithm goes through the initial
  query, identifies every hole, like $proof, and existentially
  quantifies that hole, and ask in PLN, what is the truth value that
  there exists a term for that hole such that the Theta relationship
  holes.  And so I call that PLN backward chaining query to estimate
  the probability that my initial will be successfull.

- What kind of true value do I obtain from this PLN call?  It depends.
  If PLN knows nothing about the problem at hand and I run the PLN
  query just for a few steps, it is likely not going to be able to
  find any estimate, and so I end with a truth value that represents
  total ignorance, with a confidence of zero.  If run the PLN call for
  long enough, then, because PLN knows about Theta in general, it is
  going to be able to emulate the backward chainer looking for a proof
  and eventually find it, and therefore proof its existence in that
  way, and so I will get a truth value that represents total
  certainty, with a confidence of 1.  Another way to get total
  certainty is if in the PLN_THEORY there is already an instance of
  Theta relating that particular proof to that particular proposition
  in that particular THEORY.  PLN already knows a proof exists because
  it has one in its record.  And there is another way, probably the
  most interesting one, is that PLN may not know the solution in
  advance, but it has enough knowledge to derive a truth value with
  partial certainty.  What is going to be that knowledge, it will
  typically be abstract patterns about Theta, that PLN has previously
  discovered using induction, abduction, potentially combined with
  crisp reasoning as well, etc.

- OK, so right here we have a use for that.  Because before even
  launching the initial backward chaining query, we can launch the
  corresponding PLN query, to ask: is it worth it?  If we can allocate
  a small portion of our computing budget to the PLN query, we can get
  an idea of how likely our initial query is going to succeed.  But we
  can push that even further, because what is a backward chainer?

* Estimate Probability of Conjecture to be Theorem as Guide

- A backward chainer is a recursive function.  It takes a query,
  breaks it up into subqeries, and call the backward chainer again on
  these subqueries.  There are multiple ways such queries can be
  broken up, there are several path, but at any one backward chainer
  call, there is only a finite number of paths to choose from.  Which
  are: so there are only inference rules in the backward chainer which
  are (I believe, I've learned that recently) called Condensed
  Detachement (which is like Modus Ponens with unification), and
  Condensed Generalization, which is kind of a form of universal
  quantification introduction for intuitionistic logic, I believe.  So
  it can this way, if the proposition unifies with an implication (in
  the type theoretical sense) it can go that way, or if the query
  unifies with any of the axioms, which are finite, it can go that
  way.

- So for each way, what the backward chainer can do it, build the
  corresponding PLN query, allocate a small portion of its budget,
  come up with an estimate for each way, and choose the best.  On my
  slide you can see I've indicated a truth value of <1, 1> when the
  query matches an axiom, that is because in that case it is truly
  done, once you match an axiom you're done with the proof.  But you
  have to remember that this call might actually be buried under a
  call stack, and so these unifications they will percolate up to the
  other calls on the stack and create more branches, but it is still
  going to be finite at any time.

- And here is an example of a PLN call for a condensed detachement
  branch, so you can see that the existential quantification is not
  only on the proof, but also on the premise that condensed detachment
  as just introduced.  Right, so this PLN call asks: what is the
  probability that there exists a proof, f, of something, h, that
  implies my initial proposition, and in conjunction, is h provable as
  well.

* Conclusion

- So what do I have?  Some early stage experiments that do everything
  I presented except all the induction and abduction parts of PLN.  So
  I have a small corpus of proofs and theorems that I got from
  MetaMath, thanks to Zar for suggesting MetaMath and helping me to
  understand it.  The experiment goes as follows: I first run the
  backward chainer on a handfull of small theorems to discover their
  proofs, it takes a couple of hours.  While the backward chainer is
  running it populates the PLN theory with every bit results it gets
  as theta instances, not just the proofs that were queried but every
  proof discovered along the way.  And then I rerum the experiment on
  the same corpus using PLN as a guide, and then, since it already
  knows the theorems and their proofs, it goes much faster, a couple
  of minutes.  It still needs a bit of reasoning but it is very
  shallow just to deal with the existential quantifiers.  In effect we
  just end up with a memoizer, so what it does is not impressive at
  this stage, but how it does I believe is because it is a memoizer
  that is entirely reasoning based.

- The future work is going to involve, first growing the MetaMath
  corpus, as much as possible.  And then introduce PLN rules to deal
  with uncertainty, to deal with pattern recognition and so on, as to
  be able to speed up reasoning not just on existing problems in the
  training corpus but also on new problems.

- So I am done with what I wanted to present to you, I just want to
  leave you with one last observation, which is that PLN itself is
  inside Theta.  Thank you very much.
