* Title

My talk is about using forward chaining to emulate backward chaining.

* Forward vs Backward Chaining

So let me begin

* 

And

1. by representing the data as a trie, and

2. reformulating unification in that trie representation

was able to achieve absurd speed-ups, especially for queries involving
the unification of products, like R(x, y) ∧ S(y, z), by instead of
enumerating candidates on one side, then on the other side, build the
product and filter out what's does not unify, turning the search
sideway, and operating the product unification by incrementally
traversing the trie, pruning the search as early as possible, and
manipulating solutions as tries themselves, and by minimizing the
amount of transformations that has to be operated, essentially
by-passing the enumeration of the product of candidates.

And so I was very excited about that and proceeded to port my various
chainers to MORK, and what I discovered was that

1. Backward chaining in MORK was not faster than PeTTa, and in fact
was magnitudes of times slower, which left be very perplexed.

2. But forward chaining however was a fair bit faster than PeTTa.

And so for a few months after that I had in the back of my mind that
if only I could reframe backward chaining as special form of forward
chaining, then maybe I have a chance to leverage the power of MORK.

And then one night, after having thought about that for months,
everything finally crystallized and I could precisely see how to make
it, which, as you'll see is actually very simple.

So here's the recipe, you take a theory, given here with a type
theoretic representation, so constituted of axioms and rules, so this
is the arrow time, not to be confused with logical implication,
because we are representing here a fragment of propositional
logic. And then you can actually construct an inverted corresponding
theory, such if you run this inverted theory through a forward chainer
it will actually behave like if you were running the initial theory
through a backward chainer.

* Results

With trace enabled it is about 50x faster than PeTTa.  And with no
trace, it is about x10 faster.
